guides/configuration.md, before:

# Configuration

Most configuration is done through environment variables. In the development
environment, these are stored in files for ease of editing and loading. In
production, they are set as part of the runtime environment.

## Environment Configuration

* ``CTMS_DB_URL`` - The database connection parameters, formatted as a URL.
  In the development environment, this defaults to talk to the ``postgres``
  container. In production, it is set to talk to the provisioned database.

* ``CTMS_GID`` - The group ID of the ``app`` account, used to run the CTMS
  application. If unset, defaults to 10001. On Linux development systems, set
  along with ``CTMS_UID`` to match the development user, for consistent permissions.

* ``CTMS_LOGGING_LEVEL`` - The minimum level for logs. Defaults to ``INFO`` if
  unset. Unset in production, and set to ``INFO`` in development.

* ``CTMS_SECRET_KEY`` - An encryption key, used for OAuth2 and other hashes.
  Set to a long but non-secret value for development, and set to a randomized
  string for each production deployment.

* ``CTMS_TOKEN_EXPIRATION`` - How long an OAuth2 access token is valid, in seconds.
  If unset, defaults to one hour.

* ``CTMS_SERVER_PREFIX`` - The protocol and domain part of the server name, used
  to construct full URLS. Set to ``http://localhost:8000`` in development, and
  the user-facing prefix in production.

* ``CTMS_UID`` - The user ID of the ``app`` account, used to run the CTMS
  application. If unset, defaults to 10001. On Linux development systems, set
  along with ``CTMS_GID`` to match the development user, for consistent permissions.

* ``CTMS_USE_MOZLOG`` - Use the JSON
  [MozLog](https://wiki.mozilla.org/Firefox/Services/Logging) format for logs.
  Defaults to `True` as used in production, and is set to `False` for development.

* ``MK_KEEP_DOCKER_UP`` - If unset, then ``make test`` runs ``docker-compose down``
  after tests run, shutting down the PostgreSQL container.  If set to ``1``,
  ``make test`` keeps containers running.

* ``MK_WITH_SERVICE_PORTS`` - If set to ``--service-ports``, passes that option
  to ``docker run`` commands, allowing access to host-based commands.

* ``PORT`` - The port for the web service. Defaults to 8000 if unset.

### Environment Configuration Files

The file ``ctms/config.py`` defines the environment settings for the CTMS API.

In the production environment, environment variables are set in the deployment
instances and read by the CTMS API application for configuration. When
possible, the default values of environment variables are appropriate for
production.

In the local development environment, the default configuration is in
``docker/config/local_dev.env``, and overrides are in ``.env``. The file
``docker/config/env.dist`` is the ``.env`` template for new developer
environments.

All configuration in ``.env`` is optional. Linux users should set
``CTMS_UID`` and ``CTMS_GID`` to match their user account, so that files
created inside the docker container have the same permissions as their user
account.

``.env`` is loaded in the ``Makefile``, making those configuration items
available in Makefile targets and commands. ``local_dev.env`` and ``.env``
are loaded by ``docker-compose`` and passed to Docker. Some adjust the build
process by setting `ARG` variables in the ``Dockerfile``. Others are passed
to the runtime environment. The CTMS API application then loads these from
the environment.

Commit message:

Add documentation for mozlog
Add a sample MozLog entry to the deployment guide, and document the
fields added by uvicorn, FastAPI, and the CTMS app.

Omit raw_path and root_path from the logs.

guides/configuration.md, after:

# Configuration

Most configuration is done through environment variables. In the development
environment, these are stored in files for ease of editing and loading. In
production, they are set as part of the runtime environment.

## Environment Configuration

* ``CTMS_DB_URL`` - The database connection parameters, formatted as a URL.
  In the development environment, this defaults to talk to the ``postgres``
  container. In production, it is set to talk to the provisioned database.

* ``CTMS_GID`` - The group ID of the ``app`` account, used to run the CTMS
  application. If unset, defaults to 10001. On Linux development systems, set
  along with ``CTMS_UID`` to match the development user, for consistent permissions.

* ``CTMS_LOGGING_LEVEL`` - The minimum level for logs. Defaults to ``INFO`` if
  unset. Unset in production, and set to ``INFO`` in development.

* ``CTMS_SECRET_KEY`` - An encryption key, used for OAuth2 and other hashes.
  Set to a long but non-secret value for development, and set to a randomized
  string for each production deployment.

* ``CTMS_TOKEN_EXPIRATION`` - How long an OAuth2 access token is valid, in seconds.
  If unset, defaults to one hour.

* ``CTMS_SERVER_PREFIX`` - The protocol and domain part of the server name, used
  to construct full URLS. Set to ``http://localhost:8000`` in development, and
  the user-facing prefix in production.

* ``CTMS_UID`` - The user ID of the ``app`` account, used to run the CTMS
  application. If unset, defaults to 10001. On Linux development systems, set
  along with ``CTMS_GID`` to match the development user, for consistent permissions.

* ``CTMS_USE_MOZLOG`` - Use the JSON
  [MozLog](https://wiki.mozilla.org/Firefox/Services/Logging) format for logs.
  Defaults to `True` as used in production, and is set to `False` for development.
  See the [deployment guide](./deployment_guide.md) for more information on the
  MozLog format.

* ``MK_KEEP_DOCKER_UP`` - If unset, then ``make test`` runs ``docker-compose down``
  after tests run, shutting down the PostgreSQL container.  If set to ``1``,
  ``make test`` keeps containers running.

* ``MK_WITH_SERVICE_PORTS`` - If set to ``--service-ports``, passes that option
  to ``docker run`` commands, allowing access to host-based commands.

* ``PORT`` - The port for the web service. Defaults to 8000 if unset.

### Environment Configuration Files

The file ``ctms/config.py`` defines the environment settings for the CTMS API.

In the production environment, environment variables are set in the deployment
instances and read by the CTMS API application for configuration. When
possible, the default values of environment variables are appropriate for
production.

In the local development environment, the default configuration is in
``docker/config/local_dev.env``, and overrides are in ``.env``. The file
``docker/config/env.dist`` is the ``.env`` template for new developer
environments.

All configuration in ``.env`` is optional. Linux users should set
``CTMS_UID`` and ``CTMS_GID`` to match their user account, so that files
created inside the docker container have the same permissions as their user
account.

``.env`` is loaded in the ``Makefile``, making those configuration items
available in Makefile targets and commands. ``local_dev.env`` and ``.env``
are loaded by ``docker-compose`` and passed to Docker. Some adjust the build
process by setting `ARG` variables in the ``Dockerfile``. Others are passed
to the runtime environment. The CTMS API application then loads these from
the environment.
